# intake-esgf: Programmatic Access to the Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF) Holdings

## Authors

- Nathan Collier, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
- Maxwell Grover, Argonne National Laboratory

## Abstract

In this talk we describe a new python package [intake-esgf](https://github.com/esgf2-us/intake-esgf) which provides the Earth system scientist with programmatic access to ESGF data holdings. While we have been heavily inspired by the interface developed by [intake-esm](https://github.com/intake/intake-esm), the main difference is that in place of querying an incomplete static index which is completely loaded at runtime, `intake-esgf` catalogs initialize empty and are dynamically populated by querying ESGF index nodes. Beyond the expected faceted search and parallel download features, users of climate model data will learn how `intake-esgf` [simplifies](https://intake-esgf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/modelgroups.html) refining complex searches and automates painful tasks such as locating [cell measures](https://intake-esgf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/measures.html).

We have developed `intake-esgf` following a set of guiding principles.

1. The user does not want to understand how ESGF data is organized or where the data is located. We query all indices in parallel, aggregate the dataset information, and present the result to the user as a pandas DataFrame with the location of the data hidden. Internally we track which locations provide the user the fastest transfers and automatically favor them when downloading.
2. The search code you write should be concise and descriptive enough that it becomes part of your analysis script. It is both how you download data as well as load it into a useful container for your analysis task. As you download data for use in your work, it is added to a cache that mirrors the remote storage. We check this cache before downloading a file and load it into memory if present. Research teams may wish to set a cache path to a group shared location so that data need only be downloaded once per group. 
3. Avoid downloading data if possible. In addition to the local cache, we also check fixed locations where the ESGF holdings are directly available. If you are using such a resource (for example https://nimbus.llnl.gov/), we will simply load the datasets from these locations.
4. Painful analysis tasks should be automated if possible. Earth system data scientists know that locating the cell measures (`areacella`, `areacello`, `sftlf`) can be difficult. They are at times *far* from your current set of search facets. We harvest cell measure information out of the dataset attributes and perform successive relaxing searches until we locate the measures and associate them with the  dataset automatically.

It is our aim to make climate model data easier to find and access, enabling innovative uses in the scientific analysis community as well commercial climate companies. In this talk we demonstrate this functionality and seek interactions with the community for their suggestions.
